---
layout: post
title: "Project One - Cities Rediscovering Themselves: The Aftermath of Local Law 18 in New York City's Airbnb Market Across the Boroughs"
date: 2025-01-30 10:30:00-0400
description: The biggest city in the world effectively banned short-term homestays. How did each borough react?
tags: viz pandas plotly pre-processing
categories: dtsc-3162
giscus_comments: true
related_posts: false
---

## Introduction
One of the defining features of housing throughout the 2010s was the rise of short-term homestay platforms such as Airbnb, Booking.com, and VRBO. Giving people the opportunity to temporarily rent out spaces in their house to travelers has spurred an industry in excess of $15 billion, with that figure only expected to nearly quadruple in the next decade<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup>. 

With so many financial resources at stake, governments have taken proactive measures to maintain the stability of their housing markets and prevent the price gouging frequently associated with an influx of short-term homestays at the expense of viable, long-term housing for residents. No city has perhaps enacted for aggressive measures to achieve these ends than New York City, whose Local Law 18 requires all short-term renters (short-term here defined to any stay 30 days or less) to be registered with the city—prohibiting transactions from renters that do not comply—and any visits that fall below this threshold are required to have the host remain as an occupant alongside the visitor through the duration of their stay. The repercussions of such legislative actions have been profound, and there is already a wealth of research that demonstrates the effects of such laws have fundamentally altered the duration of stay makeup across the city and have funneled money away from individual-run homestay services to hotels run by massive conglomerations (the ethicality of this switch is up to the reader) <sup id='a2'>[2](#f2),</sup><sup id='a3'>[3](#f3)</sup>. 

However, an in-depth look into a city removed more than a year from these changes has been much less prevalent. The characteristics of New York's boroughs—The Bronx, Brooklyn, Manhattan, Queens, and Staten Island—and the vastly different socioeconomic, racial, and cultural values that are intrinsic to each open the question on **who are bearing the cost of these changes the most and who remain largely unaffected?** Furthermore, **what is the current homestay market in each of the boroughs**; what similarities tie the industry together and what differences factionalize it? To further clarify, the question that I hope to find out are the geographic spatially of AirBnB listings but also how different types of listings are distributed across the city. These are the questions, among others, that this project seeks to answer. 

<p id="f1"><sup>[1]</sup><a href='https://www.businessresearchinsights.com/market-reports/homestay-platform-market-104124#:~:text=The%20global%20Homestay%20Platform%20Market%20size%20was,growing%20at%20a%20CAGR%20of%20about%2018.5%.&text=The%20global%20COVID%2D19%20pandemic%20has%20been%20unprecedented,across%20all%20regions%20compared%20to%20pre%2Dpandemic%20levels'> Source.</a></p>
<p id="f2"><sup>[2]</sup><a href='https://www.airdna.co/blog/nycs-short-term-rental-crackdown'> Source.</a></p>
<p id="f3"><sup>[3]</sup><a href='https://skift.com/2024/09/01/banned-in-nyc-airbnb-1-year-later/'> Source.</a></p>

### Where did this data even come from?
There is an awesome site called [Inside AirBnb](https://insideairbnb.com/) that has Airbnb data for a wide variety of cities across the globe; this is where I accessed any data from February 2024 - November 2024. The 2023 dataset is unfortunately limited behind a paid data request, but luckily someone made it available on [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/godofoutcasts/new-york-city-airbnb-2023-public-data/data) (yay!). 

The features of this dataset is extensive, and an entire [data dictionary](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1b_dvmyhb_kAJhUmv81rAxl4KcXn0Pymz/edit?gid=1967362979#gid=1967362979) delves into each attribute. However, both datasets include:

- The price of the AirBnb when the data was taken
- The neighborhood the AirBnb is located in
- The latitude and longtitude (approximate) of the hosting site
- The room type that is being offered
- The minimum and maximum nights a host can rent out 
- The number of days the property is available for throughout the year 

The 2024 data has quite a few more features, such as the host acceptance rate, whether they are a superhost (own a variety of properties across the area), and detailed information about the property about the number of beds within the building and bathrooms.

{::nomarkdown}
{% assign jupyter_path = "assets/jupyter/project_1.ipynb" | relative_url %}
{% capture notebook_exists %}{% file_exists assets/jupyter/project_1.ipynb %}{% endcapture %}
{% if notebook_exists == "true" %}
{% jupyter_notebook jupyter_path %}
{% else %}

<p>Sorry, the notebook you are looking for does not exist.</p>
{% endif %}
{:/nomarkdown}
